# Why-are-mountains-important-in-the-world-
**Abstract**
‘Why do mountains matter?’ considers how places are defined as mountainous: the altitude must vary by at least 300 metres over a radius of 7 kilometres, meaning that mountains cover 24% of the Earth’s land surface. The main reasons why mountains have been globally important to people for centuries are as: sources of food; sources of valuable minerals and precious stones; and places of great cultural importance. Recognition of the global importance of mountains has increased in international policy, and media attention and public understanding of mountains has grown to include a greater apprehension of mountain people and the environments on which they depend, particularly in relation to climate change.


**Historical perspectives**
There are three main reasons why mountains have been important for people at very broad scales, from regional to intercontinental, for centuries if not millennia: as sources of food and of valuable minerals and precious stones, and as places of great cultural importance. The first relates to one of our most fundamental needs. Eight parts of the world have been identified as being the original centres for the domestication of plants, and all are mainly or partly mountainous: along the Andes, around the Mediterranean, and in central America, Ethiopia, the Middle East, central Southeast Asia, China, and India. Of the twenty plants that supply 80 per cent of humanity’s food, six—maize, potatoes, barley, sorghum, apples, and tomatoes—originated in mountain areas. Another seven—wheat, rice, beans, oats, grapes, oranges, and rye—were introduced into the mountains and have been transformed into many different varieties. For those of us who enjoy coffee or tea, the former originated in the mountains of Ethiopia and the latter probably in the mountains where the frontiers of China and Myanmar are now located. Similarly, many spices originate in mountain areas, including saffron, from the mountains of western Asia, possibly Iran; and black pepper and cardamom, both from India’s Western Ghats, the basis of an international trading economy as early as 3000 bc. Many domestic animals were certainly or probably first domesticated in mountain areas, such as alpaca, goats, llama, sheep, and yaks. Farmers still actively maintain some of the great centres where this great agrobiodiversity emerged, as around Cusco in Peru, with more wild potato species than anywhere else and more than 400 of the currently used potato varieties; some farmers grow up to a hundred in one plot to minimize risks and maximize the likely yields.

p. **6**Potatoes are a prime example of the value and, in some cases, risks of the global spread of crops from mountain areas. When they were introduced to the Swiss Alps and the Khumbu of Nepal, for instance, farmers realized that potatoes yielded far more than the traditional cereals—and populations grew rapidly in the following years. The introduction of potatoes had similar consequences in many lowland areas. Yet, as millions found to their cost during the European potato famines of the 1840s and 1850s, too great a dependence on a narrow range of varieties of one crop can be risky. Hence, one of the values of the maintenance of original varieties in the mountains is the possibility to breed disease-resistant strains. While potatoes have become globally important, many of the other crops that have been grown around Cusco and elsewhere in the Andes for centuries are also widely adaptable, highly nutritious, and tasty. Yet only one of these has started to be grown and known widely outside the Andes: quinoa, now found in many supermarkets, as well as health food shops. Oca was introduced to Europe in the 1830s, but never grown widely there, in contrast to New Zealand, where it was introduced in 1860 and is known as yam. Compared to potatoes, it has similar nutritional qualities, can grow under harsher conditions, and can yield twice as much. And there are many others. Tarwi contains as much as, or more, protein than the world’s main protein crops—beans, peas, peanuts, and soybeans—and up to 20 per cent oil, as much as soybeans. It grows in marginal soils and, as it is a lupin, adds nitrogen to the soil. Kiwicha and other amaranths are highly nutritious; their proteins are far more suitable for people than most cereals. In a world with a growing population and changing environments, mountain crops may become ever more important.

The crops that originate in mountain areas are the product of evolution and human ingenuity. The minerals found in these areas have a far longer history: the extreme temperatures and pressures that created the mountains also helped to create and concentrate minerals that people could use. Most of the world’s major sources of metals are related to mountain-building, although some of the p. 7mountains have since been eroded away, and the minerals they contained have been distributed, mainly by rivers—some of which also no longer exist. So, while the metals originated in mountains, many deposits may now be far from them. One of the world’s oldest known mining sites is in Wadi Faynan at the edge of the mountains of Edom in present-day Jordan, where copper has been mined for over 8,000 years, and there has been significant pollution from smelting since the Early Bronze Age, about 5,000 years ago. Somewhat later, this copper was used to produce coins that were used around the Mediterranean in the Roman and Byzantine eras. The exploitation and trading of metals from mountain areas has been an essential element in the growth and expansion of all imperial powers, starting with the Romans. They mined iron in the mountains of Austria and Romania; gold near Aosta in the Italian Alps and in eastern Serbia; and copper in the French Alps and the Sierra Morena in Spain. These are just some examples; not all Roman mining took place in mountain areas, and they exploited and traded many more metals from other places, some as far away as India and Ethiopia.

From the early 16th century to 1700, the Spanish Habsburg Empire was the world’s greatest power. A significant factor was its mines in South America, including those at Potosí in Bolivia, a town founded in 1545 at an altitude of 4,000 metres at the base of the Cerro Rico, or rich mountain, which is largely composed of ore with a high proportion of silver—up to 25 per cent in some veins—as well as other metals (see Figure 2). By the end of the 16th century, Potosí had become the largest settlement in the Americas, with a population of at least 150,000—comparable to large European cities such as Amsterdam and London. The majority of the miners were local people; slaves were also imported. By 1824, up to 40,000 tons of silver had been produced from Cerro Rico. Subsequently, a further 10,000 tons have been produced, as well as lead, tin, and zinc. More than five centuries of mining, from pre-Columbian times onwards, have led to high levels of pollution in the water draining the mines, which flows p. 8down the Rio Pilcomayo and into Argentina. This is one of many examples of metal mining and processing, albeit on a particularly large scale, where the benefits have largely left the mountains, leaving a legacy of air and water pollution that have been inevitable because most metal ores contain sulphur and other toxic elements. Particularly from the last century, as environmental concerns have grown in countries around the world, various engineering measures have been developed to minimize the risks of water pollution, such as tailings reservoirs in which toxic chemicals can settle out and be removed or treated. However, the quantities of water and solids are often very large, and such measures are not infallible, especially when risks are difficult to assess because of inadequate data.

 Cerro Rico, rising above Potosi, Bolivia, the world’s highest city.
**2.** Cerro Rico, rising above Potosi, Bolivia, the world’s highest city.
Open in new tabDownload slide
When risks combine, and appropriate measures are not taken, the consequences for both people and the environment can be very severe. In recent years, one of the most serious examples has been the open-pit Ok Tedi mine in a remote area of Papua New Guinea, where mining of the copper and gold ore at the summit of Mount Fubilan—originally 2,095 metres high, but now more than 700 metres lower—started in 1984, when a new town was built to p. 9house the miners. Due to the lack of an effective tailings reservoir and waste retention facility, about two billion tons of untreated waste, including cyanide used for gold extraction, were discharged into the Fly River system, affecting fisheries and agriculture 1,000 kilometres downstream. It is estimated that this disaster affected 50,000 people in downstream villages, and that up to 3,000 square kilometres of forest may eventually be lost. Local communities won damages of US$28.6 million from the mining company in a court case, and one-third of the profits from the mine now go to the communities, but the mine, taken over by the Papua New Guinea government in 2013, is still open and some pollution does continue.

Thus, today, mountains remain major sources of many metals: for instance, half of the world’s tungsten comes from the mountains of southern China; almost half of the world’s silver from the mountains of western North America; and over a third of the global supply of copper from the Chilean Andes. However, metals are not the only products of mining in mountain areas that have been important for trade. In the Stone Age, from the sixth millennium bc, obsidian mined on Monte Arci in Sardinia was exported around the Mediterranean to make sharp weapons and tools. Many of the world’s gemstones come from mountains, again because of the forces that created them; and these lightweight but valuable commodities are traded around the world. In most locations, the first mining is in alluvial deposits; underground mining takes place when these have been exhausted. For example, an early emerald mine was established in Wadi Sikait in the mountains of Egypt’s Eastern Desert in the Ptolemaic period; production continued at least through Roman and Byzantine times. Today, the world’s main source of emeralds is in the eastern Andes of Colombia. In Myanmar, the Mogok valley in the Shan Highlands was the world’s principal source of rubies for centuries; these and other gemstones, such as sapphires, are still the basis of the local economy, in an area controlled by military authorities. Among semi-precious stones, lapis lazuli from the p. 10mines of Sar-e-Sang in the remote Kokcha valley of Afghanistan’s Hindu Kush has been widely exported for six millennia. As with metals, the mining and processing of gemstones provide clear economic benefits to some people, companies, and governments. However, miners and other local people often experience significant negative impacts in terms of the loss of agricultural and forest land leading to land-use conflicts, health risks from mining and polluted water, and security risks where the deposits are controlled by criminal groups. Nevertheless, as the geology of gemstone deposits usually does not create toxic chemicals, very large-scale pollution is less likely than with metal mining.

A third long-term global perspective on mountains is as places with great cultural importance. To some extent, this may be contrasted with the perspective of mountains as the source of exploitable resources, for instance through mining. It is notable that, of the world’s early imperial powers, the Romans generally had a negative view of mountains, as wastelands and obstacles to expansion and trade. Christians during the Medieval period and until the 18th and 19th centuries regarded mountains as dangerous, inhabited by demonic beings. Other major cultures had very different views of mountains. For instance, the Chinese regarded their mountain ranges as being the body of a cosmic being, possibly a dragon. In Chinese culture, dragons are viewed as benevolent and wise, in contrast to the malevolent dragons of Judeochristianity. The Chinese, as well as many other cultures—including Buddhists, Greeks, Hindus, Shintos, and pre-Columbian peoples in South and North America—regarded mountains as places where gods dwelled, controlling the weather and water supplies. Throughout history, people have made offerings to mountain gods to ensure that they continued to provide these blessings. They also form the focus of pilgrimages, most notably Mount Kailash, in Tibet, perhaps the most holy mountain on Earth as it is sacred to the adherents of the Hindu, Buddhist, Jain, and Bon religions—about a quarter of the world’s population (see Figure 3). For Hindus, it is the home of Lord Shiva; for Buddhists, p. 11the deity Demchog. One reason for its importance is undoubtedly that it is near the source of four of Asia’s major rivers: the Brahmaputra, the Indus and its tributary the Sutlej, and the Karnali, which flows into the Ganges.

 Buddhist stupas, or chorten, on the trail around Mount Kailash, Tibet.
**3.** Buddhist stupas, or chorten, on the trail around Mount Kailash, Tibet.
Open in new tabDownload slide
Mountains have therefore been regarded as places of power by significant numbers of people for a very long time. While the Greeks and Incas climbed mountains to make offerings and build shrines, people from other cultures did not climb the mountains where the gods lived, because this would be sacrilegious; the summit of Kailash remains untrodden to this day. In China, this perception changed in the 4th century ad, when people began to appreciate the beauty of mountain landscapes. The term for landscape in Chinese means ‘mountains and water’, and mountains are often painted as emerging from clouds, sometimes shown as dragons. Until the 9th century, emperors climbed the sacred mountain of T’ai Shan to conduct sacrifices, or appealed to it during times of drought, earthquake, or flood. To the east, the Shugendo religion emerged in Japan in the 7th century, with elements of Buddhism, Shintoism, and Taoism: its p. 12followers climb mountains to gain spiritual and physical power. Major peaks were climbed from the 9th century, and those who had done this were treated with reverence. Climbing mountains remains an important element of the life of many Japanese people.

Comparable attitudes to mountains did not emerge widely in European civilization until the 18th century, when Jean-Jacques Rousseau wrote about the beautiful landscapes and pure air of the Alps, influencing others, who were encouraged to climb the peaks for aesthetic reasons; in the spirit of adventure; and, often, to make scientific measurements. In England, viewpoints were first erected in 1790 in the Lake District, for visitors to enjoy the best views, as described in guidebooks. In both Europe and North America, mountains became a favourite subject for landscape painters, widening the public appeal of the mountains. The initial rise of tourism from the mid-19th century was linked particularly to the building of railways, first in Europe, and then in India and North America, allowing increasing numbers of people to visit mountain landscapes. Mountaineering also expanded globally, with ascents of all the major peaks in the Alps in the second half of the 19th century and the establishment of Alpine Clubs in many countries. Today, mountains are primary destinations for hundreds of millions of tourists each year, travelling both within their own countries and around the world to see mountain landscapes; enjoy different cultures; and, in some cases, to enjoy physical challenges. For many, they are powerful and wild places to escape to: the counterpoint to an urbanized existence—a viewpoint espoused centuries ago in eastern Asia, but much more recently in many other parts of the world.

Recognizing the global importance of mountains
So far, this chapter has argued that mountains matter in quantitative terms, with a significant proportion of our planet’s land surface and population, and have long been globally important as sources of food, valuable minerals, and precious p. 13stones, and as places of great cultural importance. In recent decades, recognition of the global importance of mountains has increased in international debates and policy arenas; and media attention and public understanding of mountains has also changed, from a focus on mountaineering exploits and natural disasters to a wider understanding of mountain people and the environments on which they depend, particularly in relation to climate change. Some key themes are explored in Chapters 3, 5, and 6, particularly their importance as ‘water towers’ and as centres of not only agricultural but also natural biodiversity, with many protected areas and major tourist destinations.

The religious significance given to mountains in many parts of the world is an implicit recognition of their importance as modifiers of climates at all scales—another reason why mountains are important. Mountain regions include some of the wettest and driest places on Earth—and influence climates at all scales. Because the Himalaya are where they are, and are so high, monsoon clouds cannot cross them, and the highest rainfalls in the world are found to their south in the Indian state of Meghalaya—where the ‘wettest place on Earth’ may be the town of Cherrapunji or the village of Mawsynram. Both receive an average of about 11.8 metres of rainfall a year: Cherrapunji has the undisputed record for the greatest total in a year—23 metres from August 1860 to July 1861, including the most in one month: 9.3 metres in July 1861. On the other side of the Himalaya, Tibet has a dry climate. Similarly, the Andes block rain clouds coming from the Pacific Ocean, leading to an arid climate in western Argentina; for the same reason, the Great Basin and Mojave deserts are in the lee of California’s Sierra Nevada.

These are all examples of the linkages between mountain ranges and wider regions. Such linkages are not only climatic and hydrological, based on the physical characteristics of mountains, but also economic and political. They involve both people living in and around the mountains and often those living far away—whether they benefit from mountain water or other p. 14resources; spend their free time in the mountains; or value mountains for religious reasons. However, in most countries, including those with the largest economies and greatest political power, the majority of people live in the lowlands, where their capitals and other major cities are found. As a result, politicians and policy-makers living in these cities have typically regarded mountain areas and their people as marginal. Conversely, only a few countries have most of their population, and their major cities, in the mountains; and these countries generally do not have great economic or political significance at the global—and often even regional—scale. Yet, over the past four decades, attention to mountain issues has grown—from almost nothing to the point where they are included in many major global events and processes.

At the first global meeting on the environment, held in Stockholm in 1972, mountain issues were not on the agenda. However, during the 1970s, scientists involved in major global research programmes, supported by UNESCO—the Man and the Biosphere (MAB) programme—and the United Nations University (UNU), initiated collaborative projects in many mountain areas around the world. In 1986, UNESCO, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), and the World Climate Research Programme jointly established the first global structure to monitor changes in mountain environments—the World Glacier Monitoring Service. Thus, by the beginning of the 1990s, scientists around the world had begun to compile significant evidence of the diverse benefits provided by mountain people and their environments, as well as the many challenges facing them. This evidence, as well as the recognition that much more work was needed to address both knowledge gaps and development challenges, provided the foundation for a small group of scientists and development experts, who had worked in mountain regions around the world, to make sure that mountains would be included specifically in the agenda of the 1992 Earth Summit, held in Rio de Janeiro. This group, which called itself ‘Mountain Agenda’, recognized that this meeting p. 15would provide a unique opportunity to alert the global community to the diverse values of mountains and the need for concerted action. Working with representatives of the government of Switzerland, as well as other delegations from mountain countries at this UN meeting, they succeeded in ensuring that ‘Agenda 21’, the plan for action for the 21st century that came out of Rio, included a chapter on sustainable mountain development. This effectively put mountains on the global agenda, along with the other ‘big issues’ such as climate change, tropical deforestation, and desertification.

Over the next few years, governments in most parts of the world came together to consider the ways in which mountains were important to their countries. Some governments created mountain institutions or passed laws to benefit mountain people. New networks of mountain people and scientists emerged. In 1995, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change included a chapter on the impacts of climate change on mountain regions in its second series of reports. Led by the government of the Central Asian state of Kyrgyzstan, momentum built up to declare an International Year of Mountains (IYM). In 1998, with the support of delegations from 130 countries, the largest number ever to support the declaration of an International Year, the United Nations General Assembly declared that this would be in 2002, providing a unique opportunity to raise awareness of the diverse values of mountains to everyone: as the slogan for the IYM stated, ‘We are all mountain people’. A total of seventy-eight countries around the world established national committees to plan and undertake a vast number and range of scientific, cultural, sporting, and many other types of activities during the IYM. International meetings also took place, culminating in the Bishkek Global Mountain Summit in Bishkek, the capital of Kyrgyzstan. This produced a final document that became the basis for a UN General Assembly resolution which designated 11 December as International Mountain Day, and encourages the international community to organize on this day events at p. 16all levels to highlight the importance of sustainable mountain development.

The year 2002 also saw the year of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, held in Johannesburg. One of the global partnerships launched at this event was the Mountain Partnership, aiming to improve the well-being, livelihoods, and opportunities of mountain people, and to protect and provide stewardship of mountain environments around the world. More than a decade later, its members—governments, intergovernmental organizations, and a great variety of other organizations—continue to work towards these goals. To some extent this has been in the context of two major global processes which were influenced by the IYM: the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) and the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (MEA). In 2004, the CBD published a programme of work which encourages governments and others to work towards the conservation, sustainable use, and sharing of the benefits of mountain biodiversity. In 2005, building on the considerable volume of knowledge developed since 1992, one of the chapters in the MEA focused on mountain ecosystems. This documents the manifold goods and services mountains provide to a large proportion of the world’s population. It underlines the continuing challenges of sustainable development for the hundreds of millions of people living in mountain areas, many due to the fact that, although the knowledge base has grown, many gaps still remain.

During the 2000s, the UN General Assembly produced a number of reports and passed resolutions in support of sustainable mountain development; and in 2012, following a global assessment of progress over the past twenty years, the final document of the global Rio+20 meeting, ‘The Future We Want’, reiterated that the benefits derived from mountain regions are essential for sustainable development. However, this document also noted many challenges: that many mountain people remain marginalized and in poverty; and that mountain ecosystems are p. 17particularly vulnerable to the negative impacts of climate change. Finally, it called for governments to work with all those concerned with the future of mountain environments and the people who depend on them, and to adopt a long-term vision and holistic approaches. Mountains, and mountain people, are now firmly part of the global agenda.
**Here are 5 reasons why we need to celebrate our peaks:**

1. Thirteen percent of the world’s population lives in the mountains. As well as providing resources and sustenance for 915 million mountain-dwelling people - 90% of which are in developing countries and 1 in 3 of which is food insecure - there are indirect benefits for billions more people.

2. Many mountains have been designated as UNESCO World Heritage Sites and biosphere reserves, recognising they play a key role in sustainable development and conservation of biodiversity. Mountains host 25% of the world’s biodiversity on land, and are home to highly specialised species that wouldn’t survive elsewhere.

3. Maize, potatoes, barley, sorghum, quinoa, tomatoes and apples - six of the 20 plant species that supply most of the world’s food - originated in mountain areas. Many high-value and high-quality foods are also produced by mountain communities, such as coffee, cocoa, honey, herbs and spices, improving livelihoods and boosting local economies.

4. Almost a third of the world’s forests can be found in mountainous regions, containing a diverse range of specialised trees that can’t survive in the lower reaches. As well as providing a home and supporting unique ecosystems, these trees play a vital role in regulating the regional climate. Absorbing huge quantities of rainwater, they are also crucial to preventing erosion, landslides and rockfalls.

5. The majority of the world’s fresh water comes from mountains: cities including Melbourne, Nairobi, New York, Rio de Janeiro and Tokyo are dependant on mountains for fresh water. This water is also vital in the production of hydropower. Some countries rely almost exclusively on mountain regions for hydropower generation.

Reference links below
[https://academic.oup.com/book/932/chapter/135504544]
[https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2019/04/why-mountains-matter-more-than-you-think/]
